## the computationalist society - a manifesto

if you are reading this, you're witnessing and participating in a miraculous feat achieved only very recently in human history. written text is an unnatural technology--language is based on sound, and recording the vibrations of our vocal cords as squiggles, then decoding them with our eyes, is not what we are born to do.

for millennia, humans lived passing stories and wisdom from generation to generation verbally. only a few places have invented written text independently, and only the highly privileged were able to wield this technology, this medium that externalizes our mental activities and lets them endure longer than ourselves, like a fossil, thus granting a form of immortality. how insane it would have sounded if they were told that nowadays we, the common people, can shame politicians and people in power for not being able to spell words or read a written word properly. how far we have come as a civilization--and all of that achieved in only the past century and a half.

what if this is just the beginning, and we're nowhere near realizing our full potential? what if we continue the effort to enable ordinary people to externalize and preserve their mental activities? one such activity, apart from basic reading and writing, is formal logic and mathematics--which, i'd argue, is not a separate subject at all but a form of reading and writing--and, as a crucial part of that, programming.

"that's absurd," you might say. "only the brightest minds could possibly comprehend such abstract concepts!"

and yet, consider how writing was once the exclusive domain of priests, scribes, and officials who held knowledge as a kind of sacred power. programming today is treated in much the same way: programmers are cast as priests in the church of computation, reserved for a small class of supposedly smart people, as if only they can understand it. "STEM!" they say.

let's consider another example of abstract symbolic technology: sheet music. what exactly is a cmin7sus11? what is a 1/128 note? what the hell is "sforzando piano"? and yet, there is no corner of the world that humans have walked that does not hear music. there is a distinction that we must make between music and sheet music, which is a european invention--a technology just as written text is to human language that helps preserve and communicate music. and there is this entirely separate, innate human capability to comprehend and create music. we understand rhythm intimately: our hearts beat at a regular interval, we breathe in and out, and we walk, left, right, left, right.

computation is exactly that—a kind of music that's part of us, albeit a quieter kind. this is how you walk to the door: while your hand cannot reach the handle, repeat: left foot, right foot, left foot, right foot. if something catches your attention, stop. as a process that unfolds over time, computation permeates our being, just like language and music. we are born with the brain wiring to think computationally, just as we are born with vocal cords and tongue muscles to make distinct sounds that carry meaning. just as you don't need to be literate to be a good orator, and you don't need to read sheet music or understand all its italian markings to be a good singer, you also don't need to parse american-english-inspired text filled with strange symbols to be a computationalist. we are all born with the hardware and software to be a good orator, a good musician, and a good computationalist.

so what does it take to reach this new era of computational literacy? first of all, i think our current approach to teaching programming and, in a broader sense, mathematics, is misguided. you probably wouldn't teach a person who has never heard music before--perhaps born deaf and just came out of a surgery that restored hearing--by teaching sheet music first. instead, you would show them what sounds are there and how you can make those sounds by pressing a key, plucking a string, or blowing into an empty cavity. how the pitch is the same but the timbres differ, how you can string a sequence of them together, alter them, and combine them. you'd be immediately intrigued and realize how much of that is already within you, because the entire body and all your senses are engaged in the process.

perhaps we could achieve the same with programming education. here is a crude idea: instead of teaching them commands and keywords, classes and typeclasses, and all kinds of syntactic and semantic constructs, we can have a video game that magnifies and simplifies the digital circuitry of computers, using a grid of registers where you can drag things around and combine them, like crafting materials in a video game; you can then record and play back what you've performed, and combine those recordings into richer, more interesting sequences, sort of like live looping, where you progressively add more elements: percussion, bass, strings, vocals. we can introduce, simultaneously, at a lower abstraction level, registers and data movement, input/output, and arithmetic and logic instructions; and at a higher abstraction level, recursion, composition, and abstraction itself. this extends the live looping metaphor to include recording and playing back the action of recording and playing it back—a meta-recording. no symbols are involved. no explicitly syntactic elements. we could just let the spring of creativity flow, nourishing the computational neural pathways, and then, the final reveal:

"you have been engaging in programming all this time! there is nothing scary about it!"

of course, there might be more ideas like this that you yourself might think of--i believe that once we are able to break free from the conception of programming as a symbolic, linguistic undertaking, the possibilities are limitless!

in the age of tiktok and generative ai, as the old-fashioned idea of rationality and optimism fades, we often look to the future with a cynical, nihilistic apathy. but what if we asked a different question: instead of thinking about what we can do with computers, or what computers can do on their own in the external physical world, what impact does actively engaging with computation--not mindlessly scrolling social media, but programming, that is, using computers as they were meant to be used--have on our internal mental world? what kind of society could we build if people were able to examine their own mental processes, methodically reflecting on their conditions, goals, assumptions, and strategies, distilling the rational computational pieces from the symphony of irrational emotions too easily exploited by politicians, corporations, and all sorts of grifters and scammers? what if people had the patience to actually read through legal text, because programming has trained them to treat tedium and challenge as ordinary, to be endured and overcome rather than avoided? what kinds of things--technologically, culturally, politically--could we achieve then?

do you want to be part of this future? what role will you play?

### my visual computing playground
| 2d (svg) | 2d (shader) | 3d (gl pipeline) | 3d (shader) | vision (classical) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| [navier–stokes](https://galmungral.github.io/FVM-CFD/) | [path rendering](https://galmungral.github.io/newton-vg/) | [graph-based mesh distortion](https://galmungral.github.io/S2-graph/) | [cylindrical map projection](https://galmungral.github.io/mercator-3d/) | [frankot-chellappa](https://galmungral.github.io/dem-reconstruction/) |
| | [hillshading](https://galmungral.github.io/hillshade/) | [terrain](https://galmungral.github.io/terrain-generator/), [2d waves](https://galmungral.github.io/fdm-2d/) | [recursive ray tracing](https://galmungral.github.io/gl-raytracer/) | |
| | [ct slices](https://galmungral.github.io/visible-human-gl/) | [particles](https://galmungral.github.io/particle-effects/), [ball and stick](https://galmungral.github.io/mol-renderer) | [ct volume](https://galmungral.github.io/visible-human-volume/), [3d waves](https://galmungral.github.io/fdm-3d/) | |
